gues has invoked his most powerful
diplomatic tool to direct the security
Council to meet over Gaza he's calling
for an urgent ceasefire to avert what he
calls a humanitarian catastrophe Let's
cross live to the UN in New York we're
joined Now by Kristen salumi so Kristen
put this in context what does this
mean yes well we have received through
diplomatic sources copy of a letter that
the Secretary General has submitted to
the security Council invoking article 99
this is the secretary General's
equivalent of pushing the panic button
article 99 in the UN Charter gives him
the authority to call for a security
council meeting for any topic that he
views as a threat to International Peace
and security it doesn't have to be on
the agenda it doesn't have to be called
by a council member and he is doing so
over the situation in Gaza in the letter
he urges uh the council to use its power
to press for a ceasefire in Gaza saying
that uh the humanitarian situation
cannot be addressed in the current uh
environment that the situation is uh at
uh that the
humanitarian uh response is at severe
risk of collapse if there is not a
ceasefire and uh more Aid is allowed to
get in he uh is doing this as a majority
of council members have actually
expressed their support for a
humanitarian ceasefire uh however the
council has not uh invoked a resolution
calling for a ceasefire the United
States has been very clear in its
opposition to doing so the United States
being a veto wielding member of the
council as recently as yesterday said
that it does not believe that Council
action would uh help the situation they
instead called for continued
negotiations said that the United States
was continuing to work with Israel to
improve the situation for humanitarian
access on the ground but uh as the
situation goes from bad to worse we see
the Secretary General uh invoking this
power to press the security Council to
take action uh that it has been unable
to do so far so this is a pretty
significant uh Ste by the Secretary
General in his entire time as Secretary
General since 2017 he has never once
used article 99 this is the first time
so that uh gives a sense of just how uh
dire the situation is in Gaza and it
comes as we just heard from the
Palestinian ambassador to the UN as well
uh he came to the stake out with a
members of the uh Arab group and
organization of Islamic cooperation to
say that they would be going to
Washington DC tomorrow to also press us
officials for a ceasefire so what we're
seeing from un officials and delegations
here at the UN is a full court press to
try to get a ceasefire uh and some
relief for the people of
Gaza all right we'll leave it there
thanks so much Kristen salumi let's